---
title: Computers are a utility &mdash; they should behave like one
tags: [ "rant" ]
---
This post inspired by _yet again going_ to pootle around on my personal
“computers” at the weekend, and _yet again **one**_ of them decides to just get
“in the way” for nearly an hour before I can actually use it for the purpose
intended.

Despite working in the tech industry, and spending 8 hours a day talking about
software, technology, & solutions to technically-inclined problems, I’m a sucker
for punishment. I like write software at the weekend! Or _maybe_ I just want a
big display & precision pointer — or I’m a luddite. _Whatever_.

So, after a week of using mobile devices for personal internetting all week with
nary an issue (I’m addicted to the internet), I open my devices on for the first
time in a week — they’ve both been connected to power & ethernet for that week —
ready to get going on some programming problem or whatever I was going to do.

_One_ of them works fine 99% of the time. Sometimes, it takes a moment to catch
up on messages; mostly it’s speedy and fine. _One_ of them — oh boy — never
works well until it’s had a few minutes to sort it self out. Then it decides to
apply some update or something — which might not require a reboot, but still
makes the device very unhappy. Then my IDE decides it needs an update, which
often goes smoothly, but I wish it would do while it was asleep.

This puts me an hour in _before I’ve done anything meaningful_. This isn’t
acceptable, and changes my relationship with technology when being used to do
something enjoyable. It makes it a chore, and removes any joy.

This week it took me an hour to fix a non-functional device — I couldn’t _type
or _use the built in trackpad_. I then spent another 45 minutes cleaning up the
almost full SSD, which I believe was causing the performance to drop off a cliff
— partially removed windows feature update installers (looking at you
`$GetCurrent` folder), and some other general non-user-created _slosh_.

My two devices? An entry-level MacBook refurb with a Core-m3 CPU, and an
entry-level Surface Laptop 2, with Core i5. Both 8gb of RAM.

Guess which one was the problematic device?

Yep, it’s a cliche: the Surface Laptop 2. It’s problems aren’t unique — these
are general windows foibles, and have plagued windows for decades.

This swirls in my head, and I think about the current narrative about Apple’s
neglection of the Mac. People will trot out the ‘I switched to Windows, and its
so much better’; maybe their experiences really *are* much better. But I can’t
match that; I just don’t have a _reliable_ experience with my Windows devices
anymore.

To put it another way — I know when I come to my MacBook it’s going to behave
like it did a week ago, or two weeks ago, or a month ago. I’ll open it up, it’ll
be mostly-sync’d with all my content, and I’ll get into what I was _intending_
to do right away. My Surface Laptop? Nope, I can’t say that. I know I’ll have to
fiddle with something.

My MacBook is _predictable_, like a utility. My Surface is _unpredictable_, with
no upside. It wasn’t cheaper, and it doesn’t _behave_ any faster. Why should I
continue to put energy into it when, to channel Marie Kondo, it doesn’t bring me
_joy_.

https://twitter.com/grork/status/1119998906408898565