---
title: "Formula One &amp; Software Development &mdash; two peas in a pod"
description: "Wherein I ruminate on the similarities between thee pinnacle of motorsport and software development"
tags: [ "software", "sports", "opinions", "technology" ]
---


It's that time of year – twelve months of hard engineering work, and your team
can share your new creation to the world. The team will be judged on its
performance relative to your competitors. Your users will speak honestly about
their love or hate for your creation. Not only has the team poured every ounce
of energy into working towards this moment, they’ve gone above & beyond to
support *last* years creation being used by those same users, against those same
competitors. They saw where they’d made mistakes, where they’d excelled —
they’ve strived to address those issues tactically with the existing product,
and strategically in the soon-to-be-revealed creation.

I am, of course, talking about Formula One (F1). It’s that time of year when
teams share their creation with the world — judgement is passed and people
search for the nuance & detail, often missing what is hidden from view. The true
test is on the track — how it’s wielded by the ~~users~~ drivers in the pressure
cooker, *getting the job done*.

I could just as easily be talking about commercial software.

# Squinting in the mirror
The long-term view of F1 isn't random — it's seen in the distance: you know
what's coming. This allows you to plan investments in your vehicle, team
members, drivers, etc. This is the **same** in a *well-run* software team! The
marketplace shows you where you need to put your investments and your customers
feedback informs what needs to be addressed immediately.

The annual financial cycle of most business defines the rhythm of work in a
software organisation. It tells you which architectural issues (chassis, aero in
F1) need to be invested in, how your marketing (race strategy in F1) needs to
address the realities of the marketplace, and how you need to adjust your
recruiting & compensation packages to retain key personnel.

Star software engineers, designers, aerodynamic visionaries will retire, or
leave for different challenges. Equally, your 10x developer (driver) will become
[disillusioned with the industry & teams
success](https://www.formula1.com/en/latest/article.breaking-four-time-champion-sebastian-vettel-to-retire-from-formula-1-at-the.65j625XK4FPq6qf2Qn5gb5.html),
and leave you. Your engineers deployed on the challenges of today. Some of them
– sometimes many, sometimes few – are deployed on whatever coming after whatever
is *now*.

Success is a product of the culture of an organisation, with a little bit of
luck to make it existing. Formula One just makes it simple to measure – every
race puts a number on the organisation's performance.

# The cycle of the ~~financial year~~ season
F1 is intrinsically driven by annual cycles – goals driven by external factors
(season, rules & regulation changes), goals revised constantly by observation of
your competitor, and on occasion, by the governing body. You seek to outperform
your competitors definitively, but it really is a game of ~~inches~~
milliseconds. Sometimes you’re lucky and you take tenths of a second.

Ostensibly the year starts with your product launch – display of the new livery,
and maybe the new car itself. You trot out a series of ~~sponsors~~ partners in
a dog and pony show to wow the world with your new creation. You talk
superlatives, but only the most deluded talk assuredly about winning & success –
you have an idea what the real-world performance is, but you don't really know
until you're all on track. In reality the team has spent the last year working
on the internal combustion engine, aerodynamics, suspension, materials, battery
technology, lubricants, fuel, safety, livery, and more to get the *best* out of
them in a way that is deployable within the regulations. The public – and the
press – discuss as a short-lived burst of energy since the last race ended only
four months prior.

Then you’re out on track racing the cars week after week for 23 races –
sometimes you might get two weeks between. You've got to *optimise* your package
'cause you don't have time to stop, you're **committed** to this concept. You
measure your technology, you analyse its performance through telemetry & data
science, and you ~~copy~~ are inspired by what your competitors have done. You
*adapt*. You also plan for *next* season, where you do this all over again with
the new insights you've learned.

Just like software.

# Further Reading
[Total
Competition](https://www.amazon.com/Total-Competition-Lessons-Strategy-Formula-ebook/dp/B01I0C8D1C)
is an interesting – if overwrought – view on *business* through storytelling of
Formula One. It’s also about building the process & the system to make short,
medium, long term in a well-oiled cycle. You don't need to understand F1 to get
value from it and is a palette cleanser for the treadmill of tech & business
books you might regularly read.